README.md, before:

# OSINT Carrier Tracker Project Documentation

## 1. Project Goals
- 构建一个基于 Next.js 的网站，在世界地图上展示美国海军航母“已知/推测的最新位置”。
- 每条位置记录需附带来源、时间戳、可信度评级与免责声明，强调信息并非实时且可能存在误差。
- 长期目标是提供一个整理公开 OSINT 资料的门户，而非精确追踪系统。

## 2. 产品定位与范围
- **核心定位**：延迟发布/历史资料展示平台，整合公开报道、官方通告与可信 OSINT 分析，突出“最后一次已公开位置”。
- **粒度预期**：以“事件”或“最近一次靠港/部署更新”为主，避免承诺每日实时更新；在界面上清晰标注更新时间差与不确定性。
- **用户价值**：为军事观察者、记者及研究者提供结构化、可视化的公开信息，同时降低误导风险。

## 3. 数据策略
### 3.1 数据源概览
- 美国海军官方新闻稿与照片发布（Navy.mil、DVIDS）。
- 国防部公开声明、舰队司令部社交媒体账号。
- 专业媒体与博客：USNI News Fleet Tracker、Naval News、The War Zone 等。
- OSINT 社群账号（推特、Reddit r/CredibleDefense 等）的部署汇总，需要 AI 审核流程校验。
- 免费卫星影像与分析文章：ESA Sentinel Hub、Planet Labs 公共图库、MarineTraffic 博客等。

### 3.2 获取与审核流程
1. **线索抓取**：利用 RSS、网页抓取或社交媒体监听脚本收集可能的航母活动报道。
2. **AI 审核**：使用定制的 NLP/多模态模型自动核对时间、地点与证据，判定可信度等级（高/中/低），并生成审核日志供复查。
3. **结构化录入**：将审核后的事件整理为统一的数据模型，并记录来源链接与摘要。
4. **定期复核**：由 AI 定期扫描历史记录，对超过一定时限未更新的条目触发复核提示，必要时标注为“位置未知/部署中”。

### 3.3 数据模型示例
| 字段 | 说明 |
| --- | --- |
| `vessel_name` | 航母名称（如 USS Gerald R. Ford） |
| `hull_number` | 船体编号（CVN-78 等） |
| `event_date` | 信息对应的日期或时间范围 |
| `location_name` | 人类可读的位置描述 |
| `latitude` / `longitude` | 如有足够证据，可给出大致坐标（保留到 0.1°-1° 精度） |
| `confidence` | 可信度等级（High / Medium / Low） |
| `evidence_type` | 信息来源类型（官方新闻、记者报道、卫星图像、社交媒体等） |
| `source_url` | 原始链接 |
| `summary` | 该事件的简要描述与上下文 |
| `last_verified_at` | 最近一次审核时间 |

数据可以存储为 JSON、数据库表（如 Supabase/PostgreSQL）或经过构建的静态文件，供前端查询。

### 3.4 更新节奏
- 保持每周或事件驱动的更新节奏，必要时通过手动方式补录。若长时间无公开信息，应明确提示“当前无可验证位置”。

## 4. 技术架构
### 4.1 前端
- 使用 Next.js 13/14（App Router）构建，支持静态生成与按需增量更新（ISR）。
- 集成 Mapbox GL JS 或 React Leaflet 展示世界地图；支持按航母筛选、时间线播放、可信度筛选。
- 提供表格视图、事件时间轴、来源列表等补充页面，增强可追溯性。
- 全站提供显著免责声明与方法论说明页面。

### 4.2 后端与数据管理
- 初期可使用 Next.js API Routes 或 Vercel Edge Functions 提供只读数据接口（JSON）。
- 数据维护可以通过独立的 CMS/数据库（Supabase、Airtable）或 Git 管理的 YAML/JSON 文件，再由构建脚本导出。
- 设立数据校验流程（lint/测试）确保字段完整性、链接可用性。

### 4.3 数据抓取与处理工具
- Node.js 脚本或轻量 serverless 任务，定时抓取 RSS/网页并输出候选事件列表。
- 结合自然语言处理（如关键词提取）驱动 AI 审核管线，确保在发布前完成自动一致性检查。
- 若需要卫星图像辅助，需评估 API 成本与许可。

## 5. 实施计划
1. **需求与设计阶段（1-2 周）**：确定航母列表、数据字段、界面原型、法律免责声明文本。
2. **数据基线建立（2-3 周）**：回溯整理过去 6-12 个月的主要部署事件，形成首批数据集。
3. **前端开发（2-3 周）**：完成地图组件、筛选、信息面板、来源列表等功能。
4. **后端/数据接口（1-2 周）**：实现数据读取 API、缓存策略、增量更新流程。
5. **测试与上线（1 周）**：可用性测试、性能优化、部署到 Vercel 或其他平台。
6. **运营与维护（持续）**：建立日/周 AI 审核与监控流程、制定投稿/纠错渠道。

## 6. 法律与伦理考量
- 所有信息需基于已公开渠道，严禁尝试获取受限制或机密数据。
- 对潜在敏感内容进行风险评估，必要时延迟发布或模糊坐标。
- 网站需显著提示“信息仅供参考，不构成官方立场”，并提供反馈/纠错途径。

## 7. 风险与缓解措施
| 风险 | 说明 | 缓解策略 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 数据缺乏 | 官方或媒体报道间隔长，无法每日更新 | 将产品定位为“最后已知位置”，允许未知状态；提供数据缺口可视化 |
| 信息误判 | OSINT 来源可能不准确 | 构建 AI 审核流程与可信度评级；保留来源原文链接 |
| 法律争议 | 涉及军事部署，存在敏感性 | 坚持使用公开信息、添加免责声明、遵守各来源使用条款 |
| 维护成本 | 数据整理耗费人力 | 建立贡献者流程、使用自动化工具辅助收集 |

## 8. 后续路线图
- 建立数据贡献者指南和 AI 审核 SOP。
- 设计导出接口（CSV/GeoJSON）供研究者使用。
- 探索可视化增强：热力图、部署趋势统计、舰队编组信息。
- 评估与其他公开情报平台合作的可能性，获取更稳定的数据源。

---

该项目文档反映了前期可行性评估的结论：技术实现简单，但可靠数据稀缺，需要以历史与公开信息汇总为核心方向推进。

## 9. Development Setup

The repository now includes an initial Next.js 14 App Router implementation inspired by `DESIGN.md`. The scaffold focuses on
rendering curated carrier events with transparent sourcing while keeping the front-end decoupled from future Supabase
ingestion pipelines.

### Requirements

- Node.js 18+
- npm (or pnpm/yarn) for dependency management

### Install & Run

```bash
npm install
npm run dev
```

### Available Scripts

- `npm run dev` – Launches the Next.js development server.
- `npm run build` – Creates an optimized production build.
- `npm run start` – Serves the production build.
- `npm run lint` – Executes ESLint using the Next.js configuration.
- `npm run typecheck` – Runs TypeScript in no-emit mode to validate the schema and API typings.

### Project Structure Highlights

- `app/` – App Router pages including the dashboard, methodology, about, and data explorer views.
- `app/api/` – Read-only API routes (`/api/vessels`, `/api/events`, `/api/events/[id]`, `/api/stats`) backed by mocked data and
  validated with Zod schemas.
- `components/` – Reusable UI primitives including the interactive Leaflet map, timeline, tables, and metric cards.
- `lib/` – Domain types, Zod schemas, and in-memory datasets that approximate the future Supabase models.

Future work includes wiring the mocked datasets to live Supabase tables, integrating Mapbox/Leaflet for geospatial
visualization, and extending automated ingestion scripts.

## 10. Data Export Endpoints

- `GET /api/export/csv?dataset=events|vessels` – Streams a UTF-8 CSV snapshot with deterministic header ordering. Optional
  query parameter selects either the event feed (default) or vessel registry; responses are cached for an hour and
  delivered with `Content-Disposition` so browsers download the file instead of opening it inline.
- `GET /api/export/geojson?dataset=events|vessels` – Returns a GeoJSON `FeatureCollection` with mirrored field names and
  point geometries. Event coordinates are rounded to one decimal place (~11 km) to satisfy the disclosure guardrails.

Both routes reuse the pure exporters in `lib/exporters.ts`, ensuring that rounding rules and schema ordering live in one
place. When connecting to live Supabase tables, prefer selecting columns in the same order as the exporters and add a
regression test or build step that serializes a representative record set through these utilities. If additional fields
are introduced later, append them to the end of the header arrays to avoid breaking existing consumers.

## 11. Fleet Metrics Calculation

- The headline statistics shown on the homepage are derived at build time by `calculateFleetStatistics` in `lib/utils.ts`,
  ensuring the metric cards always mirror the vessels and events datasets.
- `totalVessels` counts the records exported from `lib/data/vessels.ts`.
- `eventsLast30Days` includes events whose `lastVerifiedAt` timestamp falls within the past 30 days.
- `activeDeployments` counts vessels whose most recent event is both less than 30 days old and still ongoing (no end date or an
  end date in the future).
- `vesselsMissingUpdates` covers vessels with no recorded events or whose latest verification is older than 14 days, matching
  the “Needs review” card description.

该项目文档反映了前期可行性评估的结论：技术实现简单，但可靠数据稀缺，需要以历史与公开信息汇总为核心方向推进。

Commit message:

Fix Mapbox tile sizing and config

README.md, after:

# OSINT Carrier Tracker Project Documentation

## 1. Project Goals
- 构建一个基于 Next.js 的网站，在世界地图上展示美国海军航母“已知/推测的最新位置”。
- 每条位置记录需附带来源、时间戳、可信度评级与免责声明，强调信息并非实时且可能存在误差。
- 长期目标是提供一个整理公开 OSINT 资料的门户，而非精确追踪系统。

## 2. 产品定位与范围
- **核心定位**：延迟发布/历史资料展示平台，整合公开报道、官方通告与可信 OSINT 分析，突出“最后一次已公开位置”。
- **粒度预期**：以“事件”或“最近一次靠港/部署更新”为主，避免承诺每日实时更新；在界面上清晰标注更新时间差与不确定性。
- **用户价值**：为军事观察者、记者及研究者提供结构化、可视化的公开信息，同时降低误导风险。

## 3. 数据策略
### 3.1 数据源概览
- 美国海军官方新闻稿与照片发布（Navy.mil、DVIDS）。
- 国防部公开声明、舰队司令部社交媒体账号。
- 专业媒体与博客：USNI News Fleet Tracker、Naval News、The War Zone 等。
- OSINT 社群账号（推特、Reddit r/CredibleDefense 等）的部署汇总，需要 AI 审核流程校验。
- 免费卫星影像与分析文章：ESA Sentinel Hub、Planet Labs 公共图库、MarineTraffic 博客等。

### 3.2 获取与审核流程
1. **线索抓取**：利用 RSS、网页抓取或社交媒体监听脚本收集可能的航母活动报道。
2. **AI 审核**：使用定制的 NLP/多模态模型自动核对时间、地点与证据，判定可信度等级（高/中/低），并生成审核日志供复查。
3. **结构化录入**：将审核后的事件整理为统一的数据模型，并记录来源链接与摘要。
4. **定期复核**：由 AI 定期扫描历史记录，对超过一定时限未更新的条目触发复核提示，必要时标注为“位置未知/部署中”。

### 3.3 数据模型示例
| 字段 | 说明 |
| --- | --- |
| `vessel_name` | 航母名称（如 USS Gerald R. Ford） |
| `hull_number` | 船体编号（CVN-78 等） |
| `event_date` | 信息对应的日期或时间范围 |
| `location_name` | 人类可读的位置描述 |
| `latitude` / `longitude` | 如有足够证据，可给出大致坐标（保留到 0.1°-1° 精度） |
| `confidence` | 可信度等级（High / Medium / Low） |
| `evidence_type` | 信息来源类型（官方新闻、记者报道、卫星图像、社交媒体等） |
| `source_url` | 原始链接 |
| `summary` | 该事件的简要描述与上下文 |
| `last_verified_at` | 最近一次审核时间 |

数据可以存储为 JSON、数据库表（如 Supabase/PostgreSQL）或经过构建的静态文件，供前端查询。

### 3.4 更新节奏
- 保持每周或事件驱动的更新节奏，必要时通过手动方式补录。若长时间无公开信息，应明确提示“当前无可验证位置”。

## 4. 技术架构
### 4.1 前端
- 使用 Next.js 13/14（App Router）构建，支持静态生成与按需增量更新（ISR）。
- 集成 Mapbox GL JS 或 React Leaflet 展示世界地图；支持按航母筛选、时间线播放、可信度筛选。
- 提供表格视图、事件时间轴、来源列表等补充页面，增强可追溯性。
- 全站提供显著免责声明与方法论说明页面。

### 4.2 后端与数据管理
- 初期可使用 Next.js API Routes 或 Vercel Edge Functions 提供只读数据接口（JSON）。
- 数据维护可以通过独立的 CMS/数据库（Supabase、Airtable）或 Git 管理的 YAML/JSON 文件，再由构建脚本导出。
- 设立数据校验流程（lint/测试）确保字段完整性、链接可用性。

### 4.3 数据抓取与处理工具
- Node.js 脚本或轻量 serverless 任务，定时抓取 RSS/网页并输出候选事件列表。
- 结合自然语言处理（如关键词提取）驱动 AI 审核管线，确保在发布前完成自动一致性检查。
- 若需要卫星图像辅助，需评估 API 成本与许可。

## 5. 实施计划
1. **需求与设计阶段（1-2 周）**：确定航母列表、数据字段、界面原型、法律免责声明文本。
2. **数据基线建立（2-3 周）**：回溯整理过去 6-12 个月的主要部署事件，形成首批数据集。
3. **前端开发（2-3 周）**：完成地图组件、筛选、信息面板、来源列表等功能。
4. **后端/数据接口（1-2 周）**：实现数据读取 API、缓存策略、增量更新流程。
5. **测试与上线（1 周）**：可用性测试、性能优化、部署到 Vercel 或其他平台。
6. **运营与维护（持续）**：建立日/周 AI 审核与监控流程、制定投稿/纠错渠道。

## 6. 法律与伦理考量
- 所有信息需基于已公开渠道，严禁尝试获取受限制或机密数据。
- 对潜在敏感内容进行风险评估，必要时延迟发布或模糊坐标。
- 网站需显著提示“信息仅供参考，不构成官方立场”，并提供反馈/纠错途径。

## 7. 风险与缓解措施
| 风险 | 说明 | 缓解策略 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 数据缺乏 | 官方或媒体报道间隔长，无法每日更新 | 将产品定位为“最后已知位置”，允许未知状态；提供数据缺口可视化 |
| 信息误判 | OSINT 来源可能不准确 | 构建 AI 审核流程与可信度评级；保留来源原文链接 |
| 法律争议 | 涉及军事部署，存在敏感性 | 坚持使用公开信息、添加免责声明、遵守各来源使用条款 |
| 维护成本 | 数据整理耗费人力 | 建立贡献者流程、使用自动化工具辅助收集 |

## 8. 后续路线图
- 建立数据贡献者指南和 AI 审核 SOP。
- 设计导出接口（CSV/GeoJSON）供研究者使用。
- 探索可视化增强：热力图、部署趋势统计、舰队编组信息。
- 评估与其他公开情报平台合作的可能性，获取更稳定的数据源。

---

该项目文档反映了前期可行性评估的结论：技术实现简单，但可靠数据稀缺，需要以历史与公开信息汇总为核心方向推进。

## 9. Development Setup

The repository now includes an initial Next.js 14 App Router implementation inspired by `DESIGN.md`. The scaffold focuses on
rendering curated carrier events with transparent sourcing while keeping the front-end decoupled from future Supabase
ingestion pipelines.

### Requirements

- Node.js 18+
- npm (or pnpm/yarn) for dependency management

### Install & Run

```bash
npm install
npm run dev
```

> **Mapbox setup:** Create a `.env.local` file with `NEXT_PUBLIC_MAPBOX_ACCESS_TOKEN` and (optionally) `NEXT_PUBLIC_MAPBOX_STYLE_ID`.
> These values are required both locally and in deployment environments to load the map tiles.

### Available Scripts

- `npm run dev` – Launches the Next.js development server.
- `npm run build` – Creates an optimized production build.
- `npm run start` – Serves the production build.
- `npm run lint` – Executes ESLint using the Next.js configuration.
- `npm run typecheck` – Runs TypeScript in no-emit mode to validate the schema and API typings.

### Project Structure Highlights

- `app/` – App Router pages including the dashboard, methodology, about, and data explorer views.
- `app/api/` – Read-only API routes (`/api/vessels`, `/api/events`, `/api/events/[id]`, `/api/stats`) backed by mocked data and
  validated with Zod schemas.
- `components/` – Reusable UI primitives including the interactive Leaflet map, timeline, tables, and metric cards.
- `lib/` – Domain types, Zod schemas, and in-memory datasets that approximate the future Supabase models.

Future work includes wiring the mocked datasets to live Supabase tables, integrating Mapbox/Leaflet for geospatial
visualization, and extending automated ingestion scripts.

## 10. Data Export Endpoints

- `GET /api/export/csv?dataset=events|vessels` – Streams a UTF-8 CSV snapshot with deterministic header ordering. Optional
  query parameter selects either the event feed (default) or vessel registry; responses are cached for an hour and
  delivered with `Content-Disposition` so browsers download the file instead of opening it inline.
- `GET /api/export/geojson?dataset=events|vessels` – Returns a GeoJSON `FeatureCollection` with mirrored field names and
  point geometries. Event coordinates are rounded to one decimal place (~11 km) to satisfy the disclosure guardrails.

Both routes reuse the pure exporters in `lib/exporters.ts`, ensuring that rounding rules and schema ordering live in one
place. When connecting to live Supabase tables, prefer selecting columns in the same order as the exporters and add a
regression test or build step that serializes a representative record set through these utilities. If additional fields
are introduced later, append them to the end of the header arrays to avoid breaking existing consumers.

## 11. Fleet Metrics Calculation

- The headline statistics shown on the homepage are derived at build time by `calculateFleetStatistics` in `lib/utils.ts`,
  ensuring the metric cards always mirror the vessels and events datasets.
- `totalVessels` counts the records exported from `lib/data/vessels.ts`.
- `eventsLast30Days` includes events whose `lastVerifiedAt` timestamp falls within the past 30 days.
- `activeDeployments` counts vessels whose most recent event is both less than 30 days old and still ongoing (no end date or an
  end date in the future).
- `vesselsMissingUpdates` covers vessels with no recorded events or whose latest verification is older than 14 days, matching
  the “Needs review” card description.

该项目文档反映了前期可行性评估的结论：技术实现简单，但可靠数据稀缺，需要以历史与公开信息汇总为核心方向推进。
